# Database-Final-Project
CS3200 Final Project Alicia Wheeler and Tatum Whitehead

The goal of this project was to create a database for a prototype application called
WikiGardener’s. WikiGardener’s is designed for data-minded gardeners as their go-to source for
planning and improving their flower garden. Gardening can be difficult and successfully growing
plants depend on numerous garden and region-specific factors. The purpose of this database is to
support a citizen scientist’s website to foster a community for gardeners nationwide who want to
improve their gardening outcomes. Users of the website, the gardeners, can enter information
about the plants that are currently growing in their garden including details specific to the flower
as well as the plant’s location in their garden. The website aims to inform users about the local
weather, plants that best match the user’s garden, and stores where certain flowers can be found.
The database itself is populated with information from users and from third parties such as
universities that maintain datasets about the weather, flowers, and stores that sell plants. The
database collates the data together and attempts to find meaningful links between growing
conditions and a favorable flower outcome to better educate gardeners on how to grow plants in
their specific environment.


MySQL was used to develop the gardening database to store WikiGardener’s data. The database
is composed of 10 unique tables, 4 of these tables are foreign key tables to maintain connections
between tables creating a relational model. A description of the model can be found below to
better understand how the database works.

State
A state is one of the 50 states in the United States of America. A state has a name and a
two-character abbreviation of the state, for example, CA for California or MA for Massachusetts.
Many users may live in a given state and all users must have a state. States can have many
weather reports.

User
A gardener is represented as a user of the database. The database maintains limited user
information requiring a username and email. Users are not required to make garden reports, but
users have the option to make as many garden reports as they want. Users can own zero or more
flowers, since some users may be just starting to garden. Users can only live in one and only one
state. Users may shop at one or many garden stores or they may not shop at any garden store.

Flower
A flower represents a specific species of a flower. Flowers have a lot of attributes but most
notably is the unique Scientific_name and a flower_id. Flowers can be reported on by no one or
can have many reports. They can be sold by many or no stores as some flowers are rare and
cannot be bought. Users own flowers in their garden but not every flower maintained by the
database is necessarily being grown or reported on.

Garden Report
A garden report is a report of a user’s specific plant at a moment in time. It contains information
about the plant’s growth, where it is growing in the garden, and environmental factors. A report
is only about one flower and users can have multiple reports about one flower. Users may have
no reports or many reports about their garden and its flowers.

Weather
The weather is an average of the conditions in the state on a given day. It is useful for assessing
the climate of the region. Weather belongs to one or many states on a given date and a state has
one or more weather reports.

Store
A store sells flowers. Users need to know which flowers are currently available at which stores.
A user may shop at none or many stores and a store sells one or more flowers since it is a garden
store.


The database consists of two types of data since this was an application prototype project. The
data for flowers and weather was collected from online sources. The flower data was sourced
from the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Services.
From the website, we were able to extract a CSV file of about 205 rows of flower data [1]. The
weather data was sourced from a Kaggle dataset provided by Berkeley Earth. From this dataset,
we were able to extract a CSV file that contained weather reports for every state from 1855 [2].
The user information, garden reports, store information, and any necessary joins table where all
data generated by the group to build the database.

To import the flower and weather CSV file into the database, it was necessary to first clean the
data. The flower dataset was not very large, and the columns provided were necessary for the
project. The only additional information added to the dataset was an index for each of the
flowers. The weather dataset was very large containing data from 1855. Since our database is a
prototype database we wanted to narrow down the data to more recent weather reports to show
how the website would contain up to date weather reports. For the weather data, we uploaded the
entire weather dataset into MySQL using Import Wizard and created a query that would output
all the data from the year 2013 from the dataset. In addition, a query was made to insert an index
column into the dataset. The aggregated data was saved in a new CSV file.

In MySQL, the wikigarden schema was created. Into it, the clean flower and weather dataset
CSV files were imported using MySQL Import Wizard. The data tables for the user, state, garden
report, store and the joins table for state weather, user store, flower store, user flower were
manually built and populated following the ER diagram map. For users, data assumptions were
made for user information, what plants they owned, which flower stores they went to, and what
state they lived in. For garden reports, data assumptions were made up of what users created
garden reports and what information was being populated in the garden reports for different
flowers. For state data assumptions were made about what states were being used to access the
weather data. For store, data assumptions were made about what stores solid what flowers. These
assumptions were paralleled in the joins table to demonstrate that the database could be created
as per the ER diagram specifications. The data populating these tables were created by using
Mockaroo which generated random data to fill the tables [3].


The database gives users access to optimize their garden and flower growth. The following
queries are just some of the possibilities users have with this database to improve their
understanding of their garden:
● Users can access information to see how well different flowers performed in different
states. They can compare user information about how user’s plants are growing to the
expected growth of flowers.
● Users can verify if where they live is a suitable location for their plants by comparing
their information to what the flower table provides about the flower.
● Users can track the growth of flowers that are reported on. The reports lend information
about the flower such as the average height of the flower or the growth of the flower over
a period of time. By keeping track of features that affect the growth of the plant, the users
can assess what they ought to change to better their flower growth.
● Mock website design displaying garden reports for various flowers.


The goal of the project was to create a largely demonstrative database for a user-friendly
gardening application to be used by gardeners nationwide. The user of the web application would
have access to all the necessary information to be able to improve their garden. By tracking the
transformation of the garden, the database will become increasingly useful as more data is
entered. Weather and store location information, allow users to maximize their spendings, travel
time, and gardening to ensure they are buying plants that will thrive in their environment.
The design of the database is coherent and user friendly.

Some limitations: The database is unable to record the weather in any more detail than state-wide
and there are huge variations in weather across states. Users don’t have the ability to add
additional notes about their garden beyond the fields provided to them. Very often strange things
can happen in a garden and it may be useful for other gardeners to know of these peculiarities.
Users can not access other gardeners’ information or gardens unless accessing the flower data
and making comparisons to other user data. The database is currently only maintaining
information about flowers despite gardeners growing a whole variety of plants. It would be
possible to add support for other plants and less-generalized weather patterns with a few tweaks
to the tables but in doing so the database would lose efficiency because it would be maintaining
significantly more data.

A lot of the data was generated using Mockaroo.com. As such there may be some peculiarities to
it. For example, the shade and soil types listed in the garden_report table are meaningless.
Furthermore, the data generated by the demo queries will not be able to offer any useful
gardening insight because it is all based on demonstrative data.
We were successful in accomplishing the goal of this project. We were able to develop a
database that could be utilized by a website that would give users relevant gardening
information. We demonstrated how data from both third-party sources and users could be used
together to inform users of how to improve their gardens.

1. “Advanced Search: USDA PLANTS.” Advanced Search | USDA PLANTS,
plants.usda.gov/adv_search.html.
2. Earth, Berkeley. “Climate Change: Earth Surface Temperature Data.” Kaggle, 1 May
2017, www.kaggle.com/berkeleyearth/climate-change-earth-surface-temperature-data.
3. “Random Data Generator and API Mocking Tool: JSON / CSV / SQL / Excel.”
Mockaroo, www.mockaroo.com/.
4. Release, Press. “Survey Says More People Are Gardening, Even Millennials.” Garden
Center Magazine, Garden Center Magazine, 18 May 2016,
www.gardencentermag.com/article/national-gardening-survey-2016/.
5. Google Search, Google,
www.google.com/search?q=flower%2Bicon%2Bart&sxsrf=ALeKk0245DAesF_hWlPGf
TFpSgoSjXMxnQ%3A1592021283788&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=2ahUKE
wiZ7uC49f3pAhVWGDQIHey-AMYQ_AUoAXoECAwQAw&biw=1777&bih=905#im
grc=PyGMi6v8fPVloM. (for the flower art)
6. “Grocery Bazar.” Dribbble, dribbble.com/shots/11326946-Grocery-Bazar.
